#Effect of the soil degradation degree on CO2 emissions in cultivated peatland
1 Département des sols et de génie agroalimentaire; Université Laval (felix.lheureux-bilodeau.1@ulaval.ca) 2 Département des sols et de génie agroalimentaire; Université Laval (jacynthe.dessureault-rompre@fsaa.ulaval.ca)
3Institut national de la recherche scientifique (alain.rousseau@inrs.ca)
Abstract
In Québec, cultivated organic soils produce an important part of vegetable crop production. However, the necessary drainage for these soils results in soil loss of 1 to 5 cm yr-1 and the emission of CO2 gas due to peat decomposition. Efforts to establish soil conservation strategies require knowledge of the level of intensity of carbon dioxide emissions related to the physicochemical properties of soils. The initial hypothesis postulates that there is a relationship between CO2 emissions and the level of organic matter in soil.
Gas fluxes emitted from the soil were measured by the static chamber-based method from September 2021 to September 2022. Field experimentation was conducted in organic soils of southwestern Québec, on bare soil devoid of plant growth. Five sites were selected based on their organic matter content to represent a wide range of soil degradation degrees. A characterization of the sites was carried out and several physicochemical soil properties were measured.
The measured carbon fluxes vary between 3.23 (Mg C-CO2/ha/yr) and 15.28 (Mg C-CO2/ha/yr). The temperature, soil moisture, labile carbon, soil nitrogen and pH significantly influenced carbon dioxide emissions. Soil organic matter content does not have significant impact on carbon losses by decomposition. Parameters such as phenols and total microbiological activity can influence annual cumulative CO2 emissions.
Overall, carbon decomposition contributes to soil loss, but studies on cultivated plots and on a larger number of fields are required to validate results. Monitoring over several cropping seasons would improve the modeling of CO2 emissions. The study of biological parameters can also give us more information about the decomposition mechanism.
